---
title: "The Universe of the Physicist, the Chemist, and the Astronomer"
author: "Nigel Calder"
partNumber: 1
---

"Give me matter and I will build a world from it." For 200 years since the philosopher Immanuel Kant uttered it, physicists, chemists, and astronomers have striven to make good that boast. That they can now tell an almost unbroken story of events from the birth of the universe to the origin of life on Earth is the cumulative result of many lifetimes spent in careful observation and experiment. Yet even amid this success in updating the first verses of Genesis, new questions nag. Why does familiar matter adopt the forms it does? Are the laws of nature that are known to us enforced throughout the vast, tumultuous universe? What unimaginable worlds of fire or blackness can nature conjure up, quite different from our own?

When men presume to take the fire of the Sun and put it experimentally in a bottle, they forfeit all hope of certainty and repose. Yet the great quest for control over nature starts gently enough. A child at play with building blocks or sand or a rubber ball is a human mind engaged in discovering how matter behaves. Experiments with the rubber ball, for example, reveal laws of reflection. The child finds that the ball will come back to him only if he projects it accurately at a right angle to a flat surface (wall or floor); otherwise it bounces away from him and another child may grab it and interrupt the research program.

If all grown-up children had abandoned this kind of play, the human species would still believe that the Earth was at the centre of the universe, that the planets were propelled by angel-power, and that thunder was the voice of God. But some adults retained the boundless inquisitiveness of the young. Isaac Newton, not the most modest of discoverers, likened himself to a child playing on the seashore. Critics nowadays refer scathingly to the "expensive toys" of the physicists who want many millions of dollars to build a particle accelerator. Not unfairly—a particle accelerator, for all its awesome complexity and cost, is simply a modern way of continuing the experiments with the rubber ball, to see what happens when the ball is very small and travels almost at the speed of light.

By strange paths, play leads to far-reaching results. After the discovery that an electric current creates magnetism, Michael Faraday made a note to look for electricity from magnetism. He played repeatedly with magnets and wires until, ten years later, he discovered electromagnetic induction. Today, giant turbogenerators confirm his discovery 60 times a second, as they feed electric power to our factories and kitchens. In James Clerk Maxwell's hands, Faraday's ever-changing electric currents transformed themselves into mathematical equations predicting the existence of waves that traveled at the speed of light—indeed were light and invisible radiations of a similar kind, including radio waves. Other researchers who were unwittingly taking atoms to pieces came up with a beam of electrons, which inventors turned into a magic pencil; today those waves and electrons enable lesser men to preen themselves on television screens in 260,000,000 homes.

In this latter part of the 20th century, a word-association test for physicist may very well evoke bomb. By coincidence, investigators of the nature of matter and energy stumbled upon a way of breaking open the storehouse of energy in the nucleus of the atom just at the time the human species was entering a period of unprecedented warfare. The swarms of nuclear-powered submarines that cruise with nuclear-tipped, city-killing missiles are a grim enough outcome of the "game." The fact remains that the heart of physics itself is not directed to any such purpose but is an open, cooperative effort by scientists of all nations to understand the material universe we live in.

We inhabit an electric world. It is true that gravity stops us from falling headfirst into the abyss of space; true also that the daylight that powers all life comes from the nuclear reactor that we call the Sun. But of the great set of natural forces known to the physicist—gravitational, nuclear, and electromagnetic—the last, electromagnetism, is the chief governor of events on Earth.

It operates so discreetly, though, that when men started rubbing amber on their sleeves and found it attracted dust, or considered the seeming magic of the north-pointing lodestone, nothing suggested that these were more than curiosities. There was laughter when Benjamin Franklin said that lightning was electric—until he proved it. Nothing suggested that the colour, quality, and chemical behaviour of all familiar matter would be explained by research in electricity and magnetism. But that is in the nature of physics: you ponder the falling of an apple and realize what holds the planets in their courses; you look to see what happens when you pass electric currents through a gas and, in due course, you find out what holds a stone together and why grass is green.

A series of discoveries in the late 19th and early 20th centuries illuminated the hidden mechanisms of our electric world like star shells on a dark night. Diligent work by chemists had shown that all matter was composed of vast numbers of atoms, different for each chemical element and capable of combining in predictable ways to make molecules and crystals. Indeed there was a remarkable pattern in the so-called "periodic table": when the chemical elements were listed by weight, it turned out that elements 3, 11, and 19 . . . all had similar properties; 4, 12, and 20 . . . were also very much alike, and so on.

This pattern made sense only when the physicists discovered the construction of atomic matter. An atom consists of a heavy nucleus surrounded by a number of lightweight electrons exactly neutralizing the electric charge on the nucleus. The electrons group themselves around the nucleus in "shells," like the layers of an onion, each shell being capable of accommodating a definite number of electrons. The outward face of the atom, its outermost shell of electrons, is crucial in determining its chemical behaviour. The number of electrons to be fitted in depends on the charge on the nucleus. In some elements, the metals, there are only one or two easily detachable electrons in the outermost shell. Other elements, the most reactive nonmetals, fall short by only one or two electrons in having a complete outermost shell. These "surplus" and "missing" electrons create a supply-and-demand situation in which atoms combine chemically by exchanging or sharing electrons. The repetition of chemical properties throughout the periodic table arises as one shell of electrons is completed and the next one begins to fill.

The mechanisms sketched in these last few sentences account for almost all the chemical behaviour of all the matter on Earth. The electrical and magnetic behaviour of materials also depends on the arrangements of electrons in their atoms and, in some cases, on the combined effects of many atoms packed together in a crystal. The strength of the chemical bonds formed by electrons, and the related forces between molecules, determine whether materials are solids, liquids, or gases; and they help to fix the strength and flexibility of solids, but in this case the explanations are complicated by the invisible flaws that exist in all materials. The colour of materials is explicable by the "jumps," from one position to another in the vicinity of an atom, which the rules allow an electron to make as the atom, molecule, or crystal absorbs or emits light of particular energy, or colour. Make the same electrons in vast numbers of atoms "jump" the same way simultaneously and you have a very intense laser beam.

Light and its invisible counterparts—radio waves, infrared, ultraviolet, and X-rays—are the purest form of energy. These "electromagnetic radiations" are created by the jerking of electrons, sometimes quite gently, as in a radio antenna, and sometimes very fiercely, as when a beam of fast-moving electrons is suddenly halted by the target in an X-ray tube. The normal "jumps" of electrons in atoms are of intermediate intensity. All these radiant forms of energy can travel through empty space, for example from the Sun to the Earth.

But energy can readily change from one form to another. Sunlight captured by green leaves is converted into the chemical energy of plant-stuff. Coal is plant-stuff buried millions of years ago when continents collided, and a boiler can convert the chemical energy of coal into a scalding jet of steam that turns the blades of a turbine—these are forms of kinetic energy, the energy of directed movement. Using Faraday's trick, the turbine can generate electrical energy. At the end of this chain of transformations, you can switch on the electrical energy and reconvert it to light energy, thereby enjoying the benefits of sunlight after the Sun has set.

The vibrations of sound and the gravitational energy of water about to cascade down a mountainside are other forms of energy. Sooner or later, though, a shout dies away, water comes to rest, the light from your electric bulb is absorbed in the wallpaper. Where has the energy gone? It has been taken up in those random motions of atoms and molecules that we call heat. All energy degrades to meaningless heat eventually.

Unless there were continuous supplies of new energy, life and indeed all interesting activity in the universe would quickly cease. For example, your brain is kept functioning by food—chemical energy produced by sunlight just in the past few months. Those new supplies of energy come from the transformation of matter into energy.

The Sun is a very ordinary star, lying in the suburbs of a galaxy consisting of about 100,000,000,000 stars; we see the rather flat cross section of the galaxy as the Milky Way, a brushstroke of light across the night sky. There is nothing special, even, about our Galaxy; it is just one of vast numbers of galaxies scattered like ships in a great ocean of space.

The universe is a battleground between gravity and nuclear forces. To make a star, gravity sweeps together a mass of hydrogen gas; it becomes hot and nuclear reactions begin. The nuclei of hydrogen atoms combine together to make heavier elements almost, but not quite, as heavy as the sum of the hydrogen nuclei that went into them. The little bit of matter that is lost is converted into a relatively immense amount of energy. It would blow the star apart but for the strenuous restraint of gravity. A balance is struck, and the size and brightness of a star depends on its mass and on how much of its nuclear fuel has been burned. Fortunately, our star, the Sun, is a slow-burner; nevertheless, inexorable physical changes billions of years from now will make the Sun grow to fill the whole of our sky and swallow the Earth.

In a star more massive than the Sun, this "burning" of nuclear fuel proceeds faster and culminates in a vast explosion called a supernova. In the explosion, nuclear reactions proceed apace and make all the different chemical elements. The diverse atoms, heavier than hydrogen, of which our own bodies are constructed, were made in stars that exploded before the Sun was formed. Some of the heavy material was left swirling around the newborn Sun and made the Earth. Radioactive energy stored in some of the elements provided an internal source of heat for the Earth that accounts for volcanoes, earthquakes, and the slow movements of continents. Sunlight stirred the materials on the surface of the Earth into chemical activity. Eventually this activity became organized in peculiar ways, and life began.

So far, so good. But there are new mysteries that are "out of this world," in the sense that matter and energy are involved in events far more violent than anything normally encountered on the Earth or even in the Sun. The paramount questions with which physicists are now wrestling can be paraphrased as follows: Why is hydrogen the raw material of the universe? Experiments with the nucleus of the hydrogen atom—the proton—are undertaken in the big accelerators that transform the stuff of the atomic nucleus into bizarre, short-lived particles. These particles have properties, similar to electric charge, called the hypercharge and the baryon number. For example, the proton itself has, besides an electric charge of +1, a hypercharge of +1 and a baryon number of 1. However the particles may transform themselves in violent interactions, the totals of charge, hypercharge, and baryon number do not change.

Attempting to find out why this partial order remains amid the confused varieties of nuclear matter, theorists are led to the idea that the particles we see consist of combinations of other, quite different particles that they have named quarks. An early success of this theory was the prediction of the existence of a new combination, a particle called the omega minus that eventually turned up in 1964 during an experiment with the big machine at the Brookhaven National Laboratory, Long Island, N. Y. The quarks themselves have not been discovered at the time of writing.

The next big leap in understanding may well come when the theory of how small pieces of matter behave is blended with the theory of gravity, which at present concerns the huge pieces of matter that make up our universe of galaxies, stars, and planets. With such a "unified" theory physicists may at last be able to answer that question about the raw material of the universe—why hydrogen? At the same time, we shall perhaps come to understand why matter was formed in the "big bang," with which (as many astronomers now suppose) the universe came into existence some 10,000,000,000 years ago, or why the "big bang" was not merely a "big flash."

Even so fundamental an advance would not exhaust the opportunity for fresh discovery in the physical sciences. Another set of pregnant problems results from very strange objects recently discovered in the sky, namely "hot" galaxies, quasars and pulsars. The quasars, in particular, are compact objects of such extraordinary energy that existing laws of physics seem scarcely able to account for them. The pulsars, which flash many times a minute, are also very odd, but less baffling. They are evidently remnants of exploded stars that have collapsed to the enormous density of the material of the atomic nucleus. If an ocean liner were compressed to the density of a pulsar, it would be no bigger than a grain of sand.

The evidence of the pulsars encourages a further idea—one of the strangest in the whole history of man's study of matter and energy. In a pulsar, nuclear forces prevent collapse to even greater densities. But if the collapsed star were even more massive, gravity would be stronger and it would overwhelm even the nuclear forces. Then there would be nothing to stop the process until the whole star had collapsed to smaller than a peanut. Through the intense gravitational field thus set up, no light could escape, and the star would in effect disappear from the universe. Only its gravity would remain, like the grin of the Cheshire Cat in Alice in Wonderland, and, if a space traveler ran into one of these "black holes," he too would be drawn to the same invisible kernel, there to disappear forever—or at least until the laws of physics change.

The possibility that such black holes exist holds out a hope of explaining the quasars as objects of this kind from which material somehow "bounces" out. But that is only a little comfort when scientists have now to reexamine the theory of gravity, which they thought Einstein had cleared up 60 years ago, and to work out the implications of a universe peppered with black holes where the familiar laws of nature are unlikely to apply. There is even the uncomfortable suggestion that our whole universe may be just a big black hole in someone else's universe! Physics, the master science, cannot evade these new battles of the mind.
